---
title: Bourbaki and Mathematical Education
date: 2025-03-14 19:30:00 +1100

categories: [Math]
tags: [math,misc,exposition,pi-day,teaching,pedagogy,education]
image:
    path: /assets/img/image.png
---

It is 7:30 on a Friday and I'm sitting at Central Station on the train that isn't moving while the sun sets on Pi Day 2025. I thought I would do a short exposition on education in math in the modern world and how it came to be that way, as my little tribute.

## The Origins of the Didactics of Mathematics

Exactly how far back mathematical studies at the prepubescent level go is somewhat of a mystery, but the areas of arithmetic and geometry have been a staple for centuries. Euclids *Elements* for example is and has always been a relevant text in all of the western world continuously since it was written, remaining the gold standard for geometric reference until the late 1970s. Education was oriented in pragmatism and practicality, concerning largely arithmetic skills that would be essentially in navigating a civilized society. Notably there was a significant dip in the standard of education continent-wide through the aptly named dark ages. But for the most part, quality and consistency of education was strictly *monotonic* until the mid 1800s.

## Setting the Scene for an Advanced Syllabus

The *Renaissance* affected different parts of western Europe in different ways. Almost universally prolific authors emerged and made themselves known, making huge leaps in the fields of calculus, statistics, number theory and mechanics. Mathematics became something of an art practiced not by dedicated mathematicians or professors but instead by Monks (Mersenne), Religious Theologians (Pascal), Lawyers (Fermat), Diplomats (Leibniz) and people who were directors or otherwise high up at royal institutions like Banks (Newton). While arithmetic and geometry remained integral parts of the primary school syllabus, anything more advanced was not formally covered at school. It is my firm belief that the popular public opinion that maths is but a tool for physicists and scientists originated at this time as rapid advances in science demanded corresponding numeric discoveries. However, looking at the *pedagogy* of math itself remains impossible until the field becomes complex enough to require division of the curriculum by complexity.

## Effect of Rigour on Higher Education

In the 1800s, multiple movements began simultaneously- each impacting the way math was perceived by the public in varying ways. Firstly, the introduction of the industrial revolution led to a greater demand for engineers, for the first time as a formal profession with required schooling. Secondly, the formalization of mathematics beginning with the formalization of calculus in terms of epsilon-delta proofs rather than non rigorous limits meant that there was greater scope for what could be conceivvably taught in a mathematics course and a clear "roadmap" of mathematics with well defined boundaries began to emerge with increasing clarity. On top of this, access to resources increased and standardization of syllabuses for schools began. These facts contributed to the conception of a mathemtics that is comparable to the subject visible in highschool today.

## The Golden Age of Teaching

This time period just happened to synchronize with another event- the development of pedagogy as a defined field. For the first time clinical doctors and psychologists were 

## Highschool Syllabus